# GENE FAMILIES EVOLUTIONARY ANALYSES

## INTRO: 

Evolutionary studies about gene families are becoming very frequent in recent years. For example, in almost all genome paper is present a gene families expansion/contractions analyses. Indeed, has been observed how enormous amount of changes in families size can take place even between closely related organisms. There is much interest in these changes, as even the gain or loss of single genes have been implicated in adaptive divergence between species. In addition, large contractions and expansions of gene families are generally attributed to natural selection.

One of the most popular software is **[CAFE](https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/22/10/1269/237347)**, even if other apporaches based on gene and species tree exist. Its purpose is to analyze changes in gene family size in a way that accounts for phylogenetic history and provides a statistical foundation for evolutionary inferences. The program uses a birth and death process to model gene gain and loss (expressed as their mean rate, λ) across a user-specified phylogenetic tree. The distribution of family sizes generated under this model can provide a basis for assessing the significance of the observed family size differences among taxa. In breaf, CAFE try to estimates ancestral states of gene families comparing the tip states (one continouse state for each gene family).

Note that we are going to use **[CAFE 5](https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/36/22-23/5516/6039105)**: this is important, as previous versions of CAFE use different algorithms and/or statistics.

---

## PREPARING THE DATA

Please note that for our Cafe5 analysis, the dataset has changed a little bit: two species has been removed (_Helobdella robusta_ and _Acanthopleura granulata_) and OrthoFinder has been run on the _complete_ annotated proteomes (thus, more genes are present). To save time, both the OrthoFinder analysis and the divergence time estimation has been already run for you. The input you will need are <code>Orthogroups.GeneCount.fewSpecies.allGenes.tsv</code> (from OrthoFinder) and <code>New_DivergenceTime.timetree_fewSpecies.nex</code> (from lsd2 calibration).

Preparing the data for CAFE it's a really tedious process. Fortunatly OrthoFinder already provide us the Orthogroup table which is almost in the correct format. We need just a little bit of bash scripting to change few things.
We are also going to filter out orthogroups with more than 100 orthologs: this step is not required and most authors just take the OrthoFinder results as they are. In this case, we are filtering them out just to speed up the analysis a little bit.
```
awk -F "\t" 'int($NF) < 100 {print tolower($0)}' Orthogroups.GeneCount.fewSpecies.allGenes.tsv > Orthogroups.GeneCount.fewSpecies.allGenes_2.tsv 
sed -i.old 's/^/NONE\t/g' Orthogroups.GeneCount.fewSpecies.allGenes_2.tsv
rev Orthogroups.GeneCount.fewSpecies.allGenes_2.tsv | cut -d$'\t' -f 2- | rev > Orthogroups.GeneCount.fewSpecies.allGenes_ForCafe.tsv
```

Now we need to change a bit also our time tree. First of all we need to convert the nexus file into newick. There are of course many ways to do this, for example by using figtree (just open the nexus treefile - ensuring to have divergence time annotated - and save it as newick). Otherwise we can use the command line so that we maintain consistency and reproducibility of our analysis. Here we'll make _extensive_ use of regular expressions (aka, regex) and you'll see just a bunch of confusing symbols. But don't worry, you don't need to learn them (at the moment). Just run the following command to obtain a newick-formatted tree:

```
grep "tree 1" New_DivergenceTime.timetree_fewSpecies.nex |\
sed -E 's/^.+ //; s/\[\&date\=[0-9]+\]//g; s/\[\&date\=\"-[0-9]+\.[0-9]+\"\,CI_height\=\{[0-9]+\.[0-9]+\,[0-9]+\.[0-9]+\}\,CI_date\=\"\{-[0-9]+\.[0-9]+\,-[0-9]+\.[0-9]+\}\"\]//g; s/\)[0-9]+:/):/g; s/_//g' |\
awk '{print tolower($0)}' > New_DivergenceTime.timetree_fewSpecies_ForCafe.nwk
```
## ESTIMATING THE ERROR MODEL
Before estimating λ for our dataset, we can take advantage of the CAFE error model, which allow the analysis to accomodate for possible errors in gene family counts:
```
cafe5 -i Orthogroups.GeneCount.fewSpecies.allGenes_ForCafe.tsv -t New_DivergenceTime.timetree_fewSpecies_ForCafe.nwk -I 50 -e -o cafe_error_model | tee -a cafe_error.log
```

## RUNNING CAFE WITH A GLOBAL LAMBDA
We are now ready to re-estimate λ by including also the error distribution:
```
cafe5 -i 03_cafe_NEW/Orthogroups.GeneCount.fewSpecies.allGenes_ForCafe.tsv -t 03_cafe_NEW/New_DivergenceTime.timetree_fewSpecies_ForCafe.nwk -I 50 -ecafe_error_model/Base_error_model.txt -o cafe_singleLambda_withError | tee -a cafe_singleLambda_withError.log
```

Let's have a look a the top part of the <code>cafe_singleLambda_withError.log</code> file:
```
Filtering families not present at the root from: 19454 to 9410

No root family size distribution specified, using uniform distribution

Optimizer strategy: Nelder-Mead with similarity cutoff
Iterations: 50
Expansion: 2
Reflection: 1

Starting Search for Initial Parameter Values
Lambda: 0.0017764651646699
Score (-lnL): 125411.15098859
Lambda: 0.0017764651646699
Score (-lnL): 125411.15098859
Lambda: 0.0018652884229034
Score (-lnL):             inf
Lambda: 0.0016876419064364
```

First of all, we can see that CAFE filters out gene families that are not present at the root of the tree (this is a requirement to use the birth-death process) and thus keeps just 9,410 families out of 19,454 (~48%). Then, CAFE implements a uniform distribution to infer the size of each gene family in the common ancestor of our dataset. Note that we can ask CAFE to use instead a Poisson distribution for this step.

Let's now have a look at the file <code>cafe_singleLambda_withError/Base_results.txt</code>:
```
Model Base Final Likelihood (-lnL): 97995.2
Lambda: 0.000404057999231
Epsilon: -0.0394094
Maximum possible lambda for this topology: 0.00183335
59 values were attempted (2% rejected)
```
Here we are given the summary results of our analysis, including the likelihood of our model, the λ (i.e., the global rate of gene gain-loss) and the ε (the error used).

Some other interesting files are:
- <code>cafe_singleLambda_withError/Base_change.tab</code>, with counts of gene gain/loss per each node of the tree per each analysed othogroup.
- <code>cafe_singleLambda_withError/Base_clade_results.txt</code>, with global counts of gene gains and losses per each node of the tree.
- <code>cafe_singleLambda_withError/Base_family_results.txt</code>, with the indication of whether the change is significant (at p<0.05) per each orthogroup.

For a complete description of each output file, see the [CAFE5 GitHub page](https://github.com/hahnlab/CAFE5/tree/master).

## CREATE A VISUAL REPRESENTATION OF CAFE RESULTS
If we want a trivial representation of our CAFE results, and thus visually explore our analysis, we can take advantage of the CAFE python script [<code>cafe5_draw_tree.py</code>](https://github.com/hahnlab/CAFE5/blob/master/docs/tutorial/cafe5_draw_tree.py):
```
# plot the number of significantly expanded families
python3 scripts/cafe5_draw_tree.py -i cafe_singleLambda_withError/Base_clade_results.txt -d cafe_singleLambda_withError/Base_report.cafe -o tree_decrease.png -y Decrease
# plot the number of significantly contracted families
python3 scripts/cafe5_draw_tree.py -i cafe_singleLambda_withError/Base_clade_results.txt -d cafe_singleLambda_withError/Base_report.cafe -o tree_increase.png -y Increase
```

---

**This is just an example of what we can do once we have a pylogentic hypotesis about the species under study. A correct placement of lineages and species in the tree of life is therefore not only usefull *per se*, but it's almost always necessary when we want to carry out *any* type of evolutionary and comparative study!**
